---
layout: post
title: "Terms of Art: Metaphysics, Self-Consciousness, Idealism"
date: 2022-04-05
categories:
---
There are at least five particularly indefinite terms that come up reliably in Hegel and his context: metaphysics, self-consciousness, idealism, reflection, and dialectic.[^1] It is possible in principle to hear what he has to say without making use of these terms, but it is not expedient. I’m going to define them at the outset—in part because it will make further work easier, in part because I think doing so doubles as a good introduction to (or clarification of) Hegel.

This is the first of two entries in which I will define these terms. It will cover the first three. The second entry will cover the last two. Each term has a long history. I will pay minimal attention to these: at most, I will touch on their origins and some highlights of their historical use, and my choice of highlights will be extremely selective. That my definitions will agree with some historical and present-day uses of these terms, and disagree with others, is deliberate.

### Metaphysics

Aristotle says that there is a “science” of “what is insofar as it is.” The subject matter of this science is not, he says, a part or sort of what is— opposed to other parts or sorts of what is—it is *what is*, full stop.[^bignote2] As it is unopposed, *what is* is not a limited concept—limited by other concepts, from which it thereby differs—but an unlimited concept. As it is an unlimited—indeterminate—concept, it is the concept as such, or a concept in general, of which limited—determinate—concepts are special cases.[^3] “Science” means that this can be thought, and thought truly; there can be knowledge of it. This knowledge (of what is insofar as it is) is traditionally called metaphysics, after the name traditionally given to the works in which Aristotle expounds this knowledge.[^4]

In §24 of the *Encyclopedia* version of the *Logic* Hegel says that “logic coincides with metaphysics.”[^bignote5] The shortest way to making sense of this claim is through Frege, who gives us two relevant definitions of “logic”: as that which lays out “the laws of truth,” and so explains the meaning of the word “true,”[^6] and as that which prescribes by these laws “how to think wherever there is thinking at all.”[^7] If my thought is true when things are the way I think they are—where “things are,” like “what is,” is a prosentence[^bignote8]—then truth (as such, in general) coincides with what is (as such, in general). The form of any object of thought—the object of thought in general, agreement with which makes a thought true—is expressed by “it is,” “it is so,” “what is,” and so on.[^bignote9] “Logic” and “metaphysics” name this same object and the same articulation of this object.[^bignote10]

In this respect, logic and metaphysics are inseparable. They are, in another respect, distinguishable. (This is, I think, a Hegelian way of reading “coincide.”) Aristotle treats of divinity in the *Metaphysics*, not in the *Organon*. “Logic” and “metaphysics” are similarly distinguished in the tradition by the interest of metaphysicians, who may or may not be logicians, in the “meaning of the world” in Wittgenstein’s sense.[^11] There are a couple of ways in which I want to make this distinction more precise. First: Hegel made sweeping claims about the good, purportedly on the basis of the true; like Aristotle, he freely made use of the terms of divinity in doing so. Russell, a sophisticated critic of Hegel, took such claims to represent the dangers of drawing a metaphysics out of a faulty logic.[^12] Along these lines, I want to say that the true as such and the good as such are two sides of the same coin: the world. To pursue metaphysics is to pursue a picture of the world: not to have one, but to want the right one. Second: I want to say that a determination of the true as such and the good as such is, just thereby, a determination of the relation of the particular thinker and actor to the thinker and actor in general.[^bignote77] Another sense of “the meaning of the world” may be given by wherever the determination of this relation leaves, or can leave, the particular person.

### Self-Consciousness

This is an extremely familiar and extremely indefinite term. Kant and his successors are principally known for a certain way of articulating what this term names. This way of articulating self-consciousness, as I hope to bring out, has far-reaching consequences for our ordinary and extraordinary thinking and doing. The terms of this definition are Sebastian Rödl’s; it may be read as a gloss on his work.

The basic thought is this: when I think, I know myself to think what I think.[^14] Crucially, I do not know myself to think what I think after I think it, in a separate act of thought. If I try to say this, I encounter a problem. By hypothesis, the new act of thought by which I know what I think is an act of thought, and this requires another, separate act of thought—otherwise, I wouldn’t know that I think this thought. This problem repeats itself endlessly: I am unaware of each and every one of my thoughts. My awareness does not touch them. I am aware of nothing. This is *manifestly untrue*: it does not need to be *shown*, it is that *to whom things are shown*.

The problem arises if we propose to separate my knowing myself to think what I think from my thinking it. We should say instead that while I can *distinguish* my knowing that I think what I think from the thought that I think—“I think it is thus and so” from “it is thus and so”—I cannot *separate* them.[^15]

The foregoing has an unexpected outcome: we must say that thought is self-conscious. This is so for this reason: I am aware of my thought in thinking it. As we saw, my thoughts are not here, and I there, watching them. We must thus say that my thoughts and my awareness of them are aspects of one thing, which we may call “thinking” or “self-consciousness” (or, redundantly, “self-conscious thought”). “I think” and “I am self-conscious” are ways of saying the same thing. “I” is the thinker, who knows that she thinks what she thinks.[^16]

We can now see what the prefix “self-” means: it is reflexive. It does not mean that “self-consciousness” is the consciousness of a thing named by “self.” Rather, it means that what thinking is aware of in thinking is itself. What we want to articulate, articulating self-consciousness, is not something called the “self,” but thought.

Of course, reflexivity, or self-reference, characterizes thought as we understand it so far. Identifying thought as the object of inquiry is a way of identifying a method: finding the limits of what I can think; what a thought is; what is thinkable. We mark out such limits as we look for what thought is minimally: what makes the difference between thinking something and thinking nothing. This does, in the end, aim at a picture of the self that thinks: an articulation of what I know, knowing myself to think.[^bignote17]

### Aside: *meta logou*

I chose the term *meta logou* for the web address of this project and for the usernames of the associated contact methods. *Meta*, here, means “with.” *Logos* covers thought and the expression of thought as speech. For the most part, I translate it accordingly as “with concept” or “with explanation,” where an explanation is what expresses a concept. The term is well-known for its appearance in Theaetetus’ third and final attempt at a definition of knowledge—*doxa alēthēs meta logou*—in the dialogue named for him.[^18] It also appears in Aristotle’s *Metaphysics* Θ, where it marks a difference between what we can do because we think—*dunameis meta logou*—and what things that do not think can do—*dunameis alogoi*. Aristotle uses it again in the *Nicomachean* and *Eudemian Ethics*, where it marks a difference between habits of acting with the right concept—*meta tou orthou logou*—and habits of acting according to the right concept—*kata ton orthon logon*.

In each case, *meta logou* shows up as a part of an interesting discussion of what it is to think and to know. The last case stands out as an expression of self-consciousness. Specifically, it expresses self-conscious action. It does so in the following way. When I think that I am doing something, I am conscious of this. I recognize what happens as a result, when I confront it, as intentional: it is my doing in the primary sense. By contrast, when I do something without thinking that I am doing it, I am not conscious of this. I do not recognize what happens as a result, when I confront it, as intentional: it is not my doing in the primary sense. In the former case, what was done was done with the thought of doing it: if I explain it, this explanation is, as it were, “from the inside.” In the latter case, what was done was done without the thought of doing it: if I explain it, this explanation is, as it were, “from the outside.” The former action is *meta logou* with respect to its *logos*. The latter action is *kata logon* with respect to its *logos*. With this distinction, Aristotle marks out the “I think.”

I follow Aristotle here in understanding myself, and those with whom I can speak, to be *meta logou*: not only to be knowable, but to be able to know; not only to be understandable, but to be able to understand. This is so, we may say, because we are “with” the concept: not of some things, but of anything; not some concepts, but the concept as such, or in general.

### Idealism

I don’t find this term useful, but my positions are labeled this way by their advocates and detractors alike. I will try to say why I think this is so.

Bernard Williams, in defending a connection between Wittgenstein’s concerns in the *Tractatus* and *Investigations* and the concerns of Kant and his successors, glosses “idealism” this way: “[…] what the world is for us is shown by the fact that we can make sense of some things and not others: or rather […] in the fact that some things and not others make sense.” Williams attributes a method to Wittgenstein that is consistent with this idea. Speaking of “our language,”[^19] he says: “[…] we could in a way make it clearer to ourselves, by reflecting on it, as it were self-consciously exercising it; not indeed by considering alternatives—for what I am presently considering can have no comprehensible alternatives to it—but by moving around reflectively inside our view of things and sensing when one began to be near the edge by the increasing incomprehensibility of things regarded from whatever way-out point of view one had moved into. What one would become conscious of, in so reflecting, is something like: *how we go on*. And how we go on is a matter of how we think, and speak, and intentionally and socially conduct ourselves […]” These descriptions, I think, are adequate to the idealisms of both Kant and Hegel.[^20] Where I will speak of idealist concerns or positions, I will speak of these in this sense.

There are a couple subtle aspects of this thought that I want to bring out. The name “idealism” suggests an attention to the subject. As idealist positions are, in the main, metaphysical positions (in the sense discussed above), we may say that the subject, the thinker, is examined in its relation to the object, what it thinks. Everyday use of the terms “subjective” and “objective” opposes these to one another.[^21] An idealist view takes these, in a way, to coincide.[^bignote22] On a weak version of this view, we can say that a subject can be objective—that thoughts can be true, of what is—and that this true thought is just as much thought as it is true.[^23] Objectivity can be articulated simply like so: whether or not my thought is true depends on *what I think*, and therewith—because, thinking something, I know myself to think it—whether or not *I know* my thought to be true depends on what I think.[^bignote24] On a stronger version, we can say that comprehending the object of thought in general is, just thereby, comprehending the thinker, the subject of thought, in general. Subjectivity is not compromised by objectivity, on this picture, but revealed by it. And conversely.

The idealist interest in “thinking thinking thinking”[^25] amounts to this: unpacking thought is, just thereby, unpacking the relation of mind and world. This undertaking ideally results in a picture of both the mind (as such, in general) and the world (as such, in general) to which it is related, and so speaks to traditional difficulties—those customarily classified as philosophical—in picturing either term of the pair. We unpack thought by reflecting, along the lines sketched by Williams, on the object of thought in general—the object given by prosentences like “what is,” “that which is,” and “it is so.” The determination of what we have to think in order to think at all—what we always think when we think—is (just thereby) a determination of the thinker and the thinkable, or what is such as to be thought.[^26]

### Upcoming

I want to draw attention to a common theme of the three foregoing definitions, and to raise a question about it. The theme is *minimal intelligibility*: that which makes the difference between thinking something and thinking nothing. How does something fall short of this criterion? We might say: it falls short by turning out to be nothing. But how could something turn out to be nothing? How could what seems to make sense turn out to be nonsense?

### Notes

[^1]: Another is *Geist*. I am not going to define this here. This project as a whole aims such at a definition.
[^bignote2]: *Metaphysics* Γ 1: “estin epistēmē tis hē theōrei to on hē on kai ta toutō huparkhonta kath’ hauto. hautē d’ estin oudemia tōn en merei legomenōn hē autē· oudemia gar tōn allōn episkopei katholou peri tou ontos hē on, alla meros autou ti apotemomenai peri toutou theōrousi to sumbebēkos […]” W.D. Ross translates: “There is a science which investigates being as being and the attributes which belong to this in virtue of its own nature. Now this is not the same as any of the so-called special sciences; for none of these others deals generally with being as being. They cut off a part of being and investigate the attributes of this part […]” Christopher Kirwan: “There is a discipline which studies that which is *qua* thing-that-is and those things that hold good of this in its own right. This is not the same as any of what are called the special disciplines. For none of the others examines universally that which is *qua* thing-that-is, but all select some part of it and study what is coincidental concerning that […]” Sebastian Rödl: “There is a science that investigates what is insofar as it is and what belongs to it as such. It is not the same as any of the other sciences; for none of these deals generally with what is insofar as it is. They cut off a part of what is and investigate determinations of this part […]”

    I think Kirwan and Rödl have this right. Anscombe, discussing Parmenides (in *Collected Philosophical Papers, Volume One*, “Introduction”), brings out why: *to on*, and similar Greek expressions, are prosentences, for which “what is,” not “being,” is an ordinary English equivalent. She writes: “[…] “being” might be an abstract noun, equivalent to the infinitive “to be”. But Parmenides does not treat *to be* as an object, but rather *being*, i.e. something being or some being thing. It is difficult to use the participle in English in the required way, and we might get closer to the sense by saying “what is”.”
    
[^3]: Strictly speaking, *to on* is not general, because it is not a *genos*, or sort, of what is. It may be said *katholou*: of anything, or of things as a whole. We can mark the difference accordingly by calling it universal.
[^4]: It is not certain whether the name *ta meta ta phusika* is intended to characterize the subject matter of these works, or to refer to their place in the traditional arrangement of Aristotle’s corpus. I follow Irad Kimhi in *Thinking and Being*, in a way, in reading it as a characterization of the knowledge of what is insofar as it is. I don’t rule out by this reading that the name originally referred to placement in an arrangement; I don’t take Kimhi to do so, either.
[^bignote5]: *Enzyklopädie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im Grundrisse*, “Erster Teil: Die Wissenschaft der Logik,” §24: “Die *Logik* fällt daher mit der *Metaphysik* zusammen, der Wissenschaft der *Dinge* in *Gedanken* gefaßt, welche dafür galten, die *Wesenheiten der Dinge* auszudrücken.” Klaus Brinkmann and Daniel Dahlstrom translate: “*Logic* thus coincides with *metaphysics*, i.e. the science of *things* captured in *thoughts* that have counted as expressing the *essentialities of things*.”

    To my mind, the best interpretation of this passage, and of its correspondent in the “Einleitung” to the *Wissenschaft der Logik*, is Robert Pippin’s in “Hegel on Logic as Metaphysics” (in the *Oxford Handbook of Hegel*, ed. Moyar) and in *Hegel’s Realm of Shadows*.

[^6]: “Der Gedanke. Eine Logische Untersuchung”: “Wie das Wort „schön” der Ästhetik und „gut” der Ethik, so weist „wahr” der Logik die Richtung. Zwar haben alle Wissenschaften Wahrheit als Ziel; aber die Logik beschäftigt sich noch in ganz anderer Weise mit ihr. Sie verhält sich zur Wahrheit etwa so wie die Physik zur Schwere oder zur Wärme. Wahrheiten zu entdecken, ist Aufgabe aller Wissenschaften: der Logik kommt es zu, die Gesetze des Wahrseins zu erkennen. […] In den Gesetzen des Wahrseins wird die Bedeutung des Wortes „wahr” entwickelt.” Peter Geach translates: “The word “true” indicates the aim of logic as does “beautiful” that of aesthetics or “good” that of ethics. All sciences have truth as their goal; but logic is also concerned with it in a quite different way from this. It has much the same relation to truth as physics has to weight or heat. To discover truths is the task of all sciences; it falls to logic to discern the laws of truth. […] The meaning of the word “true” is explained by the laws of truth.”
[^7]: *Grundgesetze der Arithmetik*, “Vorwort”: “Jedes Gesetz, das besagt, was ist, kann aufgefasst werden als vorschreibend, es solle im Einklang damit gedacht werden, und ist also in dem Sinn ein Denkgesetz. Das gilt von den geometrischen und physikalischen nicht minder als von den logischen. Diese verdienen den Namen „Denkgesetze” nur dann mit mehr Recht, wenn damit gesagt sein soll, dass sie die allgemeinsten sind, die überall da vorschreiben, wie gedacht werden soll, wo überhaupt gedacht wird.” Philip Ebert and Marcus Rossberg translate: “Every law stating what is the case can be conceived as prescriptive, one should think in accordance with it, and in that sense it is accordingly a law of thought. This holds for geometrical and physical laws no less than for the logical. The latter better deserve the title “laws of thought” only if thereby it is supposed to be said that they are the most general laws, prescribing how to think wherever there is thinking at all.”
[^bignote8]: Some other prosentential ways of expressing true thought: “it is how I think it is”; “what I think is the case is the case”; “I think it is so, and it is so.”

    Frege’s determinate sentence forms are contents which have the indeterminate form of the prosentence. Following him, we can say that “I think *φ*(*Γ*), and *φ*(*Γ*)” is a content with the form “I think *p*, and *p*.” This content is the form, in turn, of more limited contents, and the former relates to the latter as genus to species: “I think *ψ*(*Γ*,*Δ*) is the case, and *ψ*(*Γ*,*Δ*) is the case” is a special case of “I think *φ*(*Γ*), and *φ*(*Γ*).”

    Prosentential ways of expressing false thought express a contradiction: “it is not how I think it is”; “what I think is the case is not the case”; “I think it is so, and it is not so.” The implicit contradiction here is made explicit when we understand the denied content to be *thought* by someone confronting her error, and reword these expressions accordingly: “I think it is not how I think it is”; “what I think is the case is not what I think is the case”; “I think it is so, and I think it is not so.” The contradiction is resolved as the thinker distinguishes what she now thinks from what she had thought: “I think it is not how I thought it was”; “what I think is the case is not what I thought was the case”; “I think it is so, and I thought it was not so.”
    
[^bignote9]: This needs elaboration. We can put the thought mundanely by saying that a fact in the world which could agree or disagree with our thoughts about how things are—which could make us right or wrong—must at least have the form expressed by “things are so,” or by saying that a fact must be thinkable in order for thoughts to agree or disagree with it. (This goes also for inclinations which could play a role in imagination, as in “Pegasus is a winged horse.”) A less mundane implication of this is that the standard of judgment, knowledge, is not something picked up from the world by this or that thinker at this or that time and place, but something internal to thought as such, which makes it such as to be able to pick up anything from the world at all.

    I draw in the foregoing on Rödl’s discussions of logic and metaphysics in *Categories of the Temporal* and in “Metaphysics, Thinking, and Being” (in *Idealism, Relativism, and Realism*, ed. Livingston).

[^bignote10]: A complex whole is *articulated* insofar as it is complex, as part differs from part. To articulate something is to make, or to express in language, the differences that make the complex whole the complex whole that it is.

    Frege says that the meaning of the world “true” is explained (*entwickelt*) by the laws of truth. A law, in the basic sense of the term, is a limit: it makes a difference, including this by excluding that, and conversely. So Frege says that the object of thought in general is a complex whole, articulated as part differs from part: *what is* must be determinate. And indeed it is: thinking an unlimited, or indeterminate, concept is thinking *nothing*, and therewith it is thinking that concepts must be limited, or determinate, if we are to think *something* through them. *What is* is, minimally, not what it is not. This is a law of truth: a law including *thinking something* by excluding *thinking nothing*, and conversely. The object of thought in general is determinate because thought must determine: it is *determinacy*, which is what it is by not being what it is not: *indeterminacy*. I want to bring out the implications of this Hegelian point in the first study in this series.
    
[^11]: *Tagebücher 1914-1916*, 11.6.16: “Was weiz ich über Gott und den Zweck des Lebens? Ich weiß, daß diese Welt ist. Daß ich in ihr stehe, wie mein Auge in seinem Gesichtsfeld. Daß etwas an ihr problematisch ist, was wir ihren Sinn nennen. Daß dieser Sinn nicht in ihr liegt sondern außer ihr. Daß das Leben die Welt ist. Daß mein Wille die Welt durchdringt. Daß mein Wille gut oder böse ist. Daß also Gut und Böse mit dem Sinn der Welt irgendwie zusammenhängt. Den Sinn des Lebens, d. i. den Sinn der Welt, können wir Gott nennen.” Anscombe translates: “What do I know about God and the purpose of life? I know that this world exists. That I am placed in it like my eye in its visual field. That something about it is problematic, which we call its meaning. That this meaning does not lie in it but outside it. That life is the world. That my will penetrates the world. That my will is good or evil. Therefore that good and evil are somehow connected with the meaning of the world. The meaning of life, i.e. the meaning of the world, we can call God.”
[^12]: Paul Redding and Terry Pinkard, among others, have pointed out the shortcomings of Russell’s reading of Hegel (Redding in “Time and Modality in Hegel’s Account of Judgment” (in *The Act and Object of Judgment*, ed. Ball and Schuringa) and in *Analytic Philosophy and the Return of Hegelian Thought*; Pinkard in “Hegel’s Philosophy of Mathematics”). Hegel’s extremely obscure style, and the dearth of quality commentary available to Russell, makes me inclined to be forgiving. Russell’s universalism is, in any case, at least worth engagement as a proposed alternative to Hegel’s thinking about logic.
[^bignote77]: This follows straightforwardly from a traditional problem in metaphysics, logic, and ethics: the relation of particulars and universals, or specific and general cases, or intuitions and concepts, or *what is happening here and now* and *what happens on the whole*, or *this* and *what this is*, or *this K* and *a K*, or, as Aryeh Kosman writes, “the relation between subject and predicate in the structure of being, the relation between something that is a being, and the being that that something is.” (“The Activity of Being in Aristotle’s Metaphysics,” in *Unity, Identity, and Explanation in Aristotle’s Metaphysics*, ed. Scaltsas.) The way in which Aristotle and Hegel understand this relation shows up in their logic and in their theology. They are unique in neither respect.
[^14]: The claim is neither that whatever I think is true, nor that I know that whatever I think is true. Nor is it that, whenever I think, I know *what* I think. That would defeat the purpose of an inquiry. Rather, the claim is that, whenever I think, I know *that* I think what I think. We are to find, as in any inquiry, a *what* for a *that*.
[^15]: *Kritik der reinen Vernunft*, “Transcendentale Deduction der reinen Verstandesbegriffe,” §16: “Das: Ich denke, muß alle meine Vorstellungen begleiten können; denn sonst würde etwas in mir vorgestellt werden, was gar nicht gedacht werden könnte, welches eben so viel heißt als: die Vorstellung würde entweder unmöglich, oder wenigstens für mich nichts sein.” Paul Guyer and Allen Wood translate: “The **I think** must **be able** to accompany all my representations; for otherwise something would be represented in me that could not be thought at all, which is as much as to say that the representation would either be impossible or else at least would be nothing for me.”
[^16]: A thought of which I am not aware is not a thought that I think. Someone else’s thought, which they may express to me, is a thought I must think if I am to understand them. In the best case, understanding each other, we think the same thought.
[^bignote17]: Gadamer writes in “Hegel und die antike Dialektik” (tr. Christopher Smith): “[…] what determine[s] the dialectical development [in the *Wissenschaft der Logik*] are not the conceptual relationships as such, but rather the fact that in each of these determinations of thought one thinks the “self” of the self-consciousness which claims to state each of these determinations—a “self” whose proper, fully logical exposition comes only at the end, in the “Absolute Idea.””
    
    To preview this exposition, which I will present more fully in the first study in this series: Hegel will say, at the end of a long *reductio* of proposed alternatives, that there is no thinking without thinking unity and change (thinking *something*, and that something is *happening*), that unity and change must be thought *together*, and that thinking them together is thinking *activity*. Thus, he will say, activity is thinking, and thinking is activity.
    
[^18]: *Doxa alēthēs meta logou*, which M.J. Levett and Myles Burnyeat translate as “true judgment with an account”, is sometimes assimilated to “justified true belief.” On this reading, Plato’s claim in the *Theaetetus*—or the claim that he wants to refute—is that a true belief must be accompanied by another true belief, which somehow grounds it, in order for it to be knowledge. Rosemary Desjardins, in *The Rational Enterprise* and *Plato and the Good*, finds a different understanding of *logos* at work in Plato’s thought. On her reading, *logos* does not name an ancillary belief which grounds the belief at hand. Nor does it name a unique belief that grounds many beliefs, including the belief at hand, without itself being grounded. Rather, *logos* names the activity which relates beliefs to each other as ground and grounded. More precisely, *logos* is the *organic* structure of thought through which a subject can be said to *take* a *given* object to be what it is—in Plato’s terms, to pick out the right “one” in a “many.” It is the proper articulation of this structure that remains to be carried out at the end of the *Theaetetus*.
[^19]: Wittgenstein’s talk about language, in the *Abhandlung*, is first-personal: *my* language, *my* world. Williams, discussing this idea of language, explains Wittgenstein’s later move from the first-person singular to the first-person plural this way: “[…] we can recover from the *Tractatus* discussion of the self and solipsism three ideas […] that the limits of my language are the limits of my world; that there could be no way in which those limits could be staked out from both sides—rather, the limits of language and thought reveal themselves in the *fact that* certain things are nonsensical; and (what follows from the first two, but is an important point to emphasise) that the ‘me’ and ‘my’ which occur in those remarks do not relate to an ‘I’ in the world, and hence we cannot conceive of it as a matter of empirical investigation (as the *Tractatus* is fond of putting it, a matter of ‘natural science’) to determine why my world is this way rather than that way, why my language has some features rather than others, etc. […] It may seem that these three ideas are foremost among those that Wittgenstein abandoned in his later work […] The later arguments about oneself and others are designed (among other things) to remove the need even to try to point, hopelessly, in a solipsistic direction. That need certainly exists in the *Tractatus*. The well-charted moves in the later work from ‘I’ to ‘we’ mark one and the most evident attempt to banish that need […] my chief aim will be to suggest that the move from ‘I’ to ‘we’ was not unequivocally accompanied by an abandonment of the concerns of transcendental idealism. To some extent, the three ideas I mentioned are not so much left behind, as themselves take part in the shift from ‘I’ to ‘we’: *the shift from ‘I’ to ‘we’ takes place within the transcendental ideas themselves*.” (“Wittgenstein and Idealism”)
[^20]: Finding these definitions too broad, we may want to reserve the term “idealism” to characterize the peculiarities of either Kant or Hegel, such as the former’s claim that cognition of appearances is not knowledge of what appears, or the latter’s claim that what is finite is unreal insofar as it is finite. These claims, I want to say, are best understood as purported results of the sort of project described by Williams.
[^21]: “Subjective” and “objective” are ordinarily opposed like so: subjective knowledge is knowledge of what is the case for one subject, or for some subjects; objective knowledge is knowledge of what is the case for any subject, or the subject as such. Articulated in this way, the opposition is not absolute. “Subjective” and “objective” are extraordinarily opposed like so: subjective thought is a subject’s thought of an object as it is for any subject; objective thought is a subject’s thought of an object apart from its being for any subject. This extraordinary articulation makes the opposition out to be absolute. It shows its incoherence by directing those who would think objectively to think objects without thinking them. Rejecting it, we recognize the standard of judgment, by which we measure our thoughts, to be a standard internal to thought.
[^bignote22]: Hegel makes his preliminary case for this coincidence in the *Phänomenologie des Geistes*, “Einleitung”: “Diese Darstellung, als ein *Verhalten* der *Wissenschaft* zu dem *erscheinenden* Wissen und als *Untersuchung* und *Prüfung der Realität des Erkennens* vorgestellt, scheint nicht ohne irgendeine Voraussetzung, die als Maßstab zugrunde gelegt wird, stattfinden zu können. […] Aber hier, wo die Wissenschaft erst auftritt, hat weder sie selbst noch was es sei sich als das Wesen oder als das Ansich gerechtfertigt; und ohne ein solches scheint keine Prüfung stattfinden zu können. Dieser Widerspruch und seine Wegräumung wird sich bestimmter ergeben, wenn zuerst an die abstrakten Bestimmungen des Wissens und der Wahrheit erinnert wird, wie sie an dem Bewußtsein vorkommen. Dieses *unterscheidet* nämlich etwas von sich, worauf es sich zugleich *bezieht*; oder wie dies ausgedrückt wird: es ist etwas *für dasselbe*; und die bestimmte Seite dieses *Beziehens* oder des *Seins* von etwas *für ein Bewußtsein* ist das *Wissen*. Von diesem Sein für ein Anderes unterscheiden wir aber das *Ansichsein*; das auf das Wissen Bezogene wird ebenso von ihm unterschieden und gesetzt als *seiend* auch außer dieser Beziehung; die Seite dieses Ansich heißt *Wahrheit*. […] Untersuchen wir nun die Wahrheit des Wissens, so scheint es, wir untersuchen, was es *an sich* ist. Allein in dieser Untersuchung ist es *unser* Gegenstand, es ist *für uns*; und das *Ansich* desselben, welches sich ergäbe, wäre so vielmehr sein Sein *für uns*; was wir als sein Wesen behaupten würden, wäre vielmehr nicht seine Wahrheit, sondern nur unser Wissen von ihm. […] Aber die Natur des Gegenstandes, den wir untersuchen, überhebt dieser Trennung oder dieses Scheins von Trennung und Voraussetzung. Das Bewußtsein gibt seinen Maßstab an ihm selbst, und die Untersuchung wird dadurch eine Vergleichung seiner mit sich selbst sein; denn die Unterscheidung, welche soeben gemacht worden ist, fällt in es. […] diese beiden Momente, *Begriff* und *Gegenstand*, *Für-ein-Anderes* und *Ansich-selbst-Sein*, in das Wissen, das wir untersuchen, selbst fallen […] Begriff und Gegenstand, der Maßstab und das zu Prüfende, in dem Bewußtsein selbst vorhanden sind […]” Pinkard translates: “This exposition, represented as the *conduct* of *science* in relation to knowing *as it appears*, and represented as the *investigation* and *testing of the reality of cognition*, seems incapable of taking place without some kind of presupposition which underlies it as a *standard*. […] But here, at the point where science first comes on the scene, neither science itself nor anything else has justified itself as the essence or as the in-itself, and without something like that taking place, it seems that no examination can take place at all. One can have a more determinate grasp of this contradiction and the removal of the contradiction if, first of all, one is reminded of the abstract determinations of knowing and truth as they come before consciousness. That is, consciousness *distinguishes* something from itself while at the same time it *relates* itself to it. Or, as it is expressed: This something is something *for consciousness*, and the determinate aspect of this *relating*, or of the *being* of something *for a consciousness*, is *knowing*. However, we distinguish this being-for-another from *being-in-itself*. That which is related to knowing is just as much distinguished from knowing and is posited as *being* also external to this relation. The aspect of this in-itself is called *truth*. […] If we then investigate the truth of knowing, it seems that we are investigating what knowing is *in itself*. Yet in this investigation, knowing is *our* object. It is *for us*, and the *in-itself* of knowing, which would result from the investigation, would be instead its being *for us*. What we would assert to be its essence would instead not be its truth but rather only our knowing of it. […] But the nature of the object which we are investigating goes beyond this division, or to this semblance of division and presupposition. Consciousness in its own self provides its own standard, and the investigation will thereby be a comparison of it with itself, for the difference which has just been made falls within consciousness. […] both of these moments, *concept* and *object*, *being-for-an-other* and *being-in-itself*, themselves fall within the knowing that we are investigating […] concept and object, the standard and what is to be examined, are present in consciousness itself […]”

    Hegel explains the relation of this thought to logic in the *Wissenschaft der Logik*, “Einleitung”: “In der *Phänomenologie des Geistes* habe ich das Bewußtsein in seiner Fortbewegung von dem ersten unmittelbaren Gegensatz seiner und des Gegenstandes bis zum absoluten Wissen dargestellt. Dieser Weg geht durch alle Formen des *Verhältnisses des Bewußtseins zum Objekte* durch und hat den *Begriff der Wissenschaft* zu seinem Resultate. [..] Der Begriff der reinen Wissenschaft und seine Deduktion wird in gegenwärtiger Abhandlung also insofern vorausgesetzt, als die Phänomenologie des Geistes nichts anderes als die Deduktion desselben ist. […]  Die reine Wissenschaft setzt somit die Befreiung von dem Gegensatze des Bewußtseins voraus. Sie enthält den *Gedanken, insofern er ebensosehr die Sache an sich selbst ist*, oder *die Sache an sich selbst*, insofern sie *ebensosehr der reine Gedanke ist*.” George di Giovanni translates: “In the *Phenomenology of Spirit* I have presented consciousness as it progresses from the first immediate opposition of itself and the subject matter to absolute knowledge. This path traverses all the forms of the *relation of consciousness to the object* and its result is the *concept of science*. […] The concept of pure science and its deduction is therefore presupposed in the present work in so far as the *Phenomenology of Spirit* is nothing other than that deduction. [..] Pure science thus presupposes the liberation from the opposition of consciousness. It contains *thought in so far as this thought is equally the fact as it is in itself*; or the *fact in itself* in so far as this *is equally pure thought*.”

[^23]: *Wissenschaft der Logik*, “Einleitung”: “das Sein als reiner Begriff an sich selbst und der reine Begriff als das wahrhafte Sein gewußt wird.” Di Giovanni translates: “being is known to be in itself a pure concept and the pure concept to be true being.”
[^bignote24]: Simply reversing the direction here gives us this: *what I think* is what determines whether or not my thought is true, and therewith—because, thinking something, I know myself to think it—what I think is what determines whether or not *I know* my thought to be true. Knowing ourselves to have been wrong is knowing that we are now right: a thought is only corrected by another thought.

    Rödl’s *Self-Consciousness and Objectivity* is a particularly clear presentation of this idea. Again, I draw in the foregoing on his discussion.
    
[^25]: Kosman, in *The Activity of Being: An Essay on Aristotle's Ontology*, translates by this phrase Aristotle in *Metaphysics* Λ 9: “hauton ara noei […] kai estin hē noēsis noēseōs noēsis.” Ross translates: “Therefore it must be itself that thought thinks […] and its thinking is a thinking on thinking.” Lindsay Judson translates: “*Itself*, therefore, is what thought thinks […] and its thinking is a thinking of thinking.” It may seem that, by calling this an idealist concern, I am calling Aristotle an idealist. This would be an anachronistic classification. Rather, I mean by this to take Hegel at his word when he identifies his “Idea” with this *noēsis noēseōs* at the end of the *Enzyklopädie Logik* and again at the end of the *Enzyklopädie*.
[^26]: Ordinarily, by “unthinkable” we mean “catastrophic.” Catastrophes are, of course, thinkable: they are cases of something’s being so. Were they unthinkable, they would be nothing for us, rather than catastrophic. This or that thought may, however, be *unbearable*, which fits this use of “unthinkable.” This is not a minor point.
