---
layout: post
title: The Plan
date: 2022-03-23
categories:
---
There is a short outline of what I’m aiming at with this project, and how I intend to get there, under the heading “About.” I want to say something longer here about these, because that outline does not say much. On the assumption that any readers will likely be, in some way, trained philosophers, I’m going to begin by placing myself in a field of names. On the assumption that we may misunderstand one another while using the same names, I’m going to end by getting clear about the issues that I want to take up.

### Names

The central figure in what follows will be Hegel. Aristotle will not be far off. This remove reflects the history of my own thinking, rather than a claim I want to make about their importance relative to each other. I read the one through the other, and take them to be articulating the same insight. I simply came to Hegel first.

Schematically, there are a few ways in which Hegel may be said to have enjoyed recent renewed interest. I’m going to list some of them so as to shed some light on the angle of my approach, mainly by saying which approaches are not my own. I have learned a great deal from scholars across these different routes to Hegel, but, for the most part, their starting points are not mine.

One such starting point, in the analytic tradition, is a popular blend of two elements: a certain (not unfair) reading of Frege on logic[^1] and one of any number of empiricist accounts of knowledge. Difficulties for this blend were raised, influentially, by Wittgenstein and Sellars in the middle of the twentieth century; Hegelian thought about logic and knowledge has since been taken by followers of both to be responsive to these difficulties.[^2] Another starting point, also largely in the analytic tradition, is the revival, in some form, of Aristotle’s ethical naturalism. The importance of Aristotle for Hegel’s thought—about which, unusually for readings of Hegel, there is broad agreement in the literature—makes him a natural ally, or at least a productive interlocutor.[^3] Yet another, in the continental tradition, is the critique of metaphysics, and so of Hegel, in Heidegger—I won’t pretend to understand this, or its relationship to its many successors and critics; I bring it up solely to distinguish myself from it. Another continental starting point is made by diverse schools in the interpretation of Marx and Marxists, or in the tradition of critical social theory which these inspired, which point to Hegel in some manner or another. Recent renewed interest in Marx has accordingly renewed interest in the figures with which he is associated.

I want to identify myself, cautiously and in the broadest sense, with this last route. I started reading seriously, after high school, out of two linked interests: a theory of history, and a theory of the person. In the main, my resources for the former were Marx, Braudel, and the historians and theorists they inspired; for the latter, Freud[^4] and his more systematic descendants. The extent to which I wanted or needed a clear metatheory for this was the extent to which I became interested in philosophy. This is, at least, how it seems to me in hindsight.

Some other figures to whom I will return are Plato, Kant, and Wittgenstein. Aristotelian readings of Plato are controversial; Hegelian readings of Kant more so; metaphysical readings of Wittgenstein much more so. I will be pursuing all three of these. Underneath all of this will be Nietzsche, who, if I have read him well, would have found my course of action here unfortunate, or at least a prelude to a course of action foreign to the one suggested by the words “logic” and “ethics.” The thought that this might be so is not in the least limited to his work. This project may be read as an indirect engagement with that thought, the status of which will come into view only at the end.

### Issues

This project emerged out of a reflection on the ways in which I make sense of things and on the resulting picture of things as a whole. There are some traditional problems that such reflection encounters.

Some basic problems are those having to do with unity (crudely, what we say of something when we say it is a thing): what it is for a thing to be itself, or what else we must say to say that it is so (or the illusory status of identity, internality, and simplicity), or what it is for a thing to not be another thing, or what else we must say to say that it is so (or the illusory status of difference, externality, and complexity). Bound up with these are problems having to do with change (crudely, what we say of something when we say that it is somehow not what it was): change that could happen (or the illusory status of possibility), change that is happening (or the illusory status of actuality), change that had to happen (or the illusory status of necessity), or change that could have just as well not happened (or the illusory status of contingency). I take these problems to be common to the ancient and modern traditions, and I take different thinkers in these traditions to be best marked out by their positions on these problems. In the ancient and modern traditions, respectively, I take Aristotle and Hegel to have the strongest positions on this set of problems, not least because their positions are such as to account for themselves (more on that later).

Another set of basic problems are those having to do with life (crudely, what we say of something when we say that it is something for which there can be good and bad): what makes the difference between good and bad (if these are not illusory), or where and when life begins and ends (if it does). Again, I take these problems to be common to the ancient and modern traditions; again, I take Aristotle and Hegel to have the strongest positions on this set of problems, not least because they are inseparable from their positions on unity and change (again, more on that later).

Implied in the foregoing is the problem of illusion: what counts as true, what counts as false, and what makes the difference. An account of this (and this, to my mind, is the Hegelian turn) would be an account of thought, of that which can think truly and think falsely, and the result would be that rare position which accounts for itself: in Sebastian Rödl’s phrase, it would be the articulation of what anyone always already knows in any thought; in Aryeh Kosman’s phrase, it would be "thinking thinking thinking." If a putative account of truth and falsity stopped anywhere short of this, it would fail to account for thinking, and would not be able to say whatever it means to say about thinking truly. This idea bears on the issues sketched above (and this aspect of the idea, to my mind, is the Kantian turn): an account of thought as such can shed light on unity and change by accounting for that which thinks unity and change, and thinks nothing without them. Where this point is implicit in Aristotle—and I do take this to be implicit in Aristotle[^5]—it is explicit in Hegel.

Accordingly, my interest here will be in an account of thought, and so of the thinkable. Specifically, my focus will be on theoretical and practical thought and their relation. Theoretical and practical thought are traditionally marked out by what they think; namely, what is and what to do, or the true and the good. Their relation is traditionally ambiguous. It is this relation that I want to clarify.

The title of this project may not seem to reflect that interest. Why “Logic,” and why “Ethics”—why not “True, Good, Life”? And why “Life?” To the first concern: many things are said to be true or good, and so many projects speak of what is and what to do; as it may be said, many contents have these forms. I am interested in these forms. Traditionally, the disciplines for which these forms are the objects are logic and ethics: logic investigates and articulates the true (and the false) as such;[^6] ethics investigates and articulates the good (and the bad) as such.[^7] It is in this sense, and only incidentally in any other sense, that I use these names. To the second concern: Aristotle and Hegel, among others, give the name “life” to something lying at the heart of both logic and ethics, embracing, integrating, and explaining the issues connected with unity, change, and worth. It is what “life” names in this context that I want to make sense of. This should amount to a comprehension of theoretical and practical thought by way of a comprehension of the activity that they are.

In the main, my interest here will be ethical. I am concerned with theoretical thought, or what is, to the extent that it bears on practical thought, or what to do. This does not mean that I will be neglecting theoretical issues; on the contrary, if we can say that logic bears on ethics (or that it absolutely does not), what we have thereby said is as significant for logic as it is for ethics. Conversely, this does not mean that I will try to make entries in ongoing ethical discussions. I want to take up ethics insofar as it is (in a manner of speaking) brought out by logic.

Another reason for the names “logic” and “ethics” are their traditional resonances with, respectively, the concept named by “word” and that named by “person.” This suggests a preliminary definition of the link between thinking and doing that I want to develop. In a narrow way, our thought about what is the case here and now bears on our thought about what to do here and now. In a broad way, what we think the world is like on the whole—what it allows for and what it does not—bears on our conduct in it on the whole. The upshot of the clarity about thinking and doing that I want to achieve will be the picture of the world that comes out of it. It is this sort of picture, I want to say, that provides the link between what someone says—by which we are usually said to understand them—and what someone does—by which we are usually said to truly understand them.

My nearest ancestors in the sort of work I want to do here are Sebastian Rödl and John McDowell. I’ll close with two remarks of theirs which I think bring this aim out well.

<ul>
"If the human being is the life that thinks, then understanding what the human being is requires understanding what thought is, and understanding what thought is cannot fall short of providing knowledge of what it is to be a human being." (from “Logic, Being, and Nothing”)
</ul>

<ul>
"We have not properly made sense of forms of words in a language if we have not, thereby, got some way towards making sense of its speakers." (from “On the Sense and Reference of a Proper Name”)
</ul>

### Upcoming

Over the next several weeks, I’m going to put up a couple of studies that bear on this theme. The terms in which I will do this will be familiar to Hegel scholars or interested philosophers as those of his ongoing reception at Universität Leipzig, the University of Pittsburgh, and the University of Chicago; I call this “analytic German Idealism” after the Forschungskolleg at Leipzig. The first will present what Hegel calls “Idea”—a name under which he represents life, thinking, and doing at the end of the *Science of Logic*—and discuss its significance for the theme outlined above. The second will present the idea of activity in Aristotle and discuss it in light of the results of the first study.

Before I do this, I’m going to put up a short piece about some difficult terms of art in Hegel and his interlocutors, about which I want to get clear off the bat.

I hope that this will be of some use.

### Notes

[^1]: This is a delicate issue. Briefly, it turns on whether or not Frege's concept-script is adequate to the aim entailed by his own conception of logic. Some skilled treatments of Frege's logic from the point of view which I want to take up here are Martijn Wallage's in "Thinkable Facts," Sebastian Rödl's in (among others) "Self-Consciousness, Negation, and Disagreement" and the first chapter of *Categories of the Temporal*, and Irad Kimhi's in *Thinking and Being*.
[^2]: Paul Redding provides a history of this development in *Analytic Philosophy and the Return of Hegelian Thought*. See also Willem deVries, "Hegel's Revival in Analytic Philosophy" (in the *Oxford Handbook of Hegel*, ed. Moyar).
[^3]: Thompson, a participant in this revival, points this out in the introduction to *Life and Action*.
[^4]: Auden's Freud remains important to me: "[...] he wished to think of our life from whose unruliness so many plausible young futures with threats or flattery ask obedience [...]"
[^5]: This, I think, is one of the lessons of Kimhi's *Thinking and Being*. More accessibly, Jonathan Lear makes the identity of the metaphysical thinker with the subject matter of metaphysics central to his presentation in *Aristotle: The Desire to Understand*. For a precise treatment of some recognizably Hegelian themes in Aristotle, see Sean Kelsey’s *Mind and World in Aristotle’s De Anima*.
[^6]: This is not a heterodox conception of logic. Frege writes in “Der Gedanke” (tr. Peter Geach): “The word "true" indicates the aim of logic as does "beautiful" that of aesthetics or "good” that of ethics. All sciences have truth as their goal; but logic is also concerned with it in a quite different way from this. […] To discover truths is the task of all sciences; it falls to logic to discern the laws of truth.”
[^7]: In “A Lecture on Ethics,” Wittgenstein endorses Moore’s definition of ethics as “the general inquiry into what is good,” before bringing out the peculiar consequences of this idea of “absolute value.” I want to follow his thinking, in a way, about these consequences.
